README.md, before:

# StratGAN

Coupling a generative adversarial network with image quilting to produce basin-scale realizations of fluvial stratigraphy.

<img src="https://github.com/amoodie/stratgan/blob/master/private/basin_demo_fine.gif" alt="basin_demo_fine_gif">


This was a project that began out of an interest to educate myself on machine learning topics, in association with a [class I organized](http://andrewjmoodie.com/2018/12/machine-learning-seminar/).
The project goal was to explore subsurface uncertainty quantification through the use of GANs, and it is meant to be an exploratory analysis and thought experiment.
I have decided to open source the project so that it is available as part of my professional portfolio.

This page contains some brief explanation of the model, but omits a lot of detail.
I hope to detail the model in a manuscript in the future. 

## Abstract
Subsurface reservoir size estimates involve considerable uncertainty, which impacts the quality of  reserve size and valuation models.
Conventional rules-based and process-based numerical models are useful to model this uncertainty, but involve simplifying assumptions about depositional environments and reservoir geology that may be poorly constrained.
Generative adversarial neural networks (GANs) are a machine learning model that is optimized to produce synthetic data that are indistinguishable from an arbitrary training dataset, and are an attractive tool for modeling subsurface reservoirs.
We have developed a generative adversarial network that is trained on laboratory experimental stratigraphy and produces realizations of basin-scale reservoir geology, while honoring ground-truth well log data. 
In this way, StratGAN reduces subsurface uncertainty through a large sampling of realistic potential rock geometries throughout a reservoir, without any a priori assumptions about the geology.
StratGAN couples a deep-convolutional generative adversarial network (DCGAN) with an image quilting algorithm to scale up channel-scale realizations of reservoir geometries to basin-scale realizations.


## Model description
The model is a deep-convolutional generative adversarial network (DCGAN) that has been trained on laboratory experiment data. 
I use custom `tensorflow` implementations of convolutional layers and dense layers, which include my flexible batch normalization operation.
The GAN is trained on patches cropped out of slices from the Tulane Delta Basin 10-1 experiment.
Each of 6 slices was treated as separate categorical labels and fed into the GAN as a one-hot label vector.

<img src="https://github.com/amoodie/stratgan/blob/master/private/tulane_slice.png" alt="patch_demo" width=300>

*Figure 1: example of slice from Tulane Delta Basin experiment that was cropped to produce training data. Red box is approximate size of cropped training image. Note that this image shows only a small part of the slice.*



## Demonstration of workflow

Patches from the GAN are at approximately the channel scale, where black pixels represent channel, and white is non-channel.

<img src="https://github.com/amoodie/stratgan/blob/master/private/logo.png" alt="patch_demo" width=150>

*Figure 2: patch realization from the trained GAN.*

I have implemented Efros-Freeman minimum-cost-boundary image quilting, which stiches together the patches from the GAN (channel scale) to make a single realization at the basin scale. 
The patches fed to the E-F algorithm are optimized via conditional inpainting methods (e.g., Dupont et al., 2018) to match along the quilting overlap, as well as at any ground-truth data (e.g., cores).

Together, this method optimizes for the best patch possible, then identifies the best path for cut-and-pasting in the image quilting stage.
I have produced routines to include ground-truth data in the basin scale realizations, such as vertical core-logs that record channel and non-channel intervals.

<img src="https://github.com/amoodie/stratgan/blob/master/private/basin_demo.gif" alt="basin_demo_gif" width=400>

*Figure 3: Example of ground-truthed realization. Similar to image at top of page, but has coarser intervals of channel bodies in the core logs. This demonstrates the variability of realizations from the model.*

We can produce an ensemble of \~100 realizations from the model, and average the samples to produce a static image, quantifying the expected probability of reservoir presence at any location. 

<img src="https://github.com/amoodie/stratgan/blob/master/private/mean_array_map.png" alt="mean_array_map" width=410>

*Figure 4: Ensemble average realization for bottom panel in Figure 3, darker color indicates higher probability of reservoir presence.*

Going one step further, we can query the size of the reservoir connected to a specific channel interval in a core log (red dashed line in Figure 4).
This analysis gives a low-side-high-side estimate of reservoir size.

<img src="https://github.com/amoodie/stratgan/blob/master/private/example_size_dist_density.png" alt="lowsidehighside" width=350>

*Figure 5: Quantification of probability of reservoir size at red dashed box in Figure 4. We can quantify p10, p50, p90 estimates to give a low-side-high-side estimate of reservoir size.*

The model is a proof-of-concept for using GANs in subsurface uncertainty quantification. 


## Dependencies
 * `Python3`
 * `tensorflow` <2.0
 * `scipy`, `numpy`
 * `matplotlib`


## References
* Dupont et al., 2018; [https://arxiv.org/abs/1802.03065](https://arxiv.org/abs/1802.03065)

Commit message:

update readme with data info

README.md, after:

# StratGAN

Coupling a generative adversarial network with image quilting to produce basin-scale realizations of fluvial stratigraphy.

<img src="https://github.com/amoodie/stratgan/blob/master/private/basin_demo_fine.gif" alt="basin_demo_fine_gif">


This was a project that began out of an interest to educate myself on machine learning topics, in association with a [class I organized](http://andrewjmoodie.com/2018/12/machine-learning-seminar/).
The project goal was to explore subsurface uncertainty quantification through the use of GANs, and it is meant to be an exploratory analysis and thought experiment.
I have decided to open source the project so that it is available as part of my professional portfolio.

This page contains some brief explanation of the model, but omits a lot of detail.
I hope to detail the model in a manuscript in the future. 



## Abstract
Subsurface reservoir size estimates involve considerable uncertainty, which impacts the quality of  reserve size and valuation models.
Conventional rules-based and process-based numerical models are useful to model this uncertainty, but involve simplifying assumptions about depositional environments and reservoir geology that may be poorly constrained.
Generative adversarial neural networks (GANs) are a machine learning model that is optimized to produce synthetic data that are indistinguishable from an arbitrary training dataset, and are an attractive tool for modeling subsurface reservoirs.
We have developed a generative adversarial network that is trained on laboratory experimental stratigraphy and produces realizations of basin-scale reservoir geology, while honoring ground-truth well log data. 
In this way, StratGAN reduces subsurface uncertainty through a large sampling of realistic potential rock geometries throughout a reservoir, without any a priori assumptions about the geology.
StratGAN couples a deep-convolutional generative adversarial network (DCGAN) with an image quilting algorithm to scale up channel-scale realizations of reservoir geometries to basin-scale realizations.



## Model description
The model is a deep-convolutional generative adversarial network (DCGAN) that has been trained on laboratory experiment data. 
I use custom `tensorflow` implementations of convolutional layers and dense layers, which include my flexible batch normalization operation.
The GAN is trained on patches cropped out of slices from the Tulane Delta Basin 10-1 experiment.
Each of 6 slices was treated as separate categorical labels and fed into the GAN as a one-hot label vector.

<img src="https://github.com/amoodie/stratgan/blob/master/private/tulane_slice.png" alt="patch_demo" width=300>

*Figure 1: example of slice from Tulane Delta Basin experiment that was cropped to produce training data. Red box is approximate size of cropped training image. Note that this image shows only a small part of the slice.*



## Demonstration of workflow

Patches from the GAN are at approximately the channel scale, where black pixels represent channel, and white is non-channel.

<img src="https://github.com/amoodie/stratgan/blob/master/private/logo.png" alt="patch_demo" width=150>

*Figure 2: patch realization from the trained GAN.*

I have implemented Efros-Freeman minimum-cost-boundary image quilting, which stiches together the patches from the GAN (channel scale) to make a single realization at the basin scale. 
The patches fed to the E-F algorithm are optimized via conditional inpainting methods (e.g., Dupont et al., 2018) to match along the quilting overlap, as well as at any ground-truth data (e.g., cores).

Together, this method optimizes for the best patch possible, then identifies the best path for cut-and-pasting in the image quilting stage.
I have produced routines to include ground-truth data in the basin scale realizations, such as vertical core-logs that record channel and non-channel intervals.

<img src="https://github.com/amoodie/stratgan/blob/master/private/basin_demo.gif" alt="basin_demo_gif" width=400>

*Figure 3: Example of ground-truthed realization. Similar to image at top of page, but has coarser intervals of channel bodies in the core logs. This demonstrates the variability of realizations from the model.*

We can produce an ensemble of \~100 realizations from the model, and average the samples to produce a static image, quantifying the expected probability of reservoir presence at any location. 

<img src="https://github.com/amoodie/stratgan/blob/master/private/mean_array_map.png" alt="mean_array_map" width=410>

*Figure 4: Ensemble average realization for bottom panel in Figure 3, darker color indicates higher probability of reservoir presence.*

Going one step further, we can query the size of the reservoir connected to a specific channel interval in a core log (red dashed line in Figure 4).
This analysis gives a low-side-high-side estimate of reservoir size.

<img src="https://github.com/amoodie/stratgan/blob/master/private/example_size_dist_density.png" alt="lowsidehighside" width=350>

*Figure 5: Quantification of probability of reservoir size at red dashed box in Figure 4. We can quantify p10, p50, p90 estimates to give a low-side-high-side estimate of reservoir size.*

The model is a proof-of-concept for using GANs in subsurface uncertainty quantification. 



## Dependencies

 * `Python3`
 * `tensorflow` <2.0
 * `scipy`, `numpy`
 * `matplotlib`


### Data

You will need to download the data from [https://zenodo.org/record/3661411](https://zenodo.org/record/3661411) and place it in the appropriate folder.
The cropped and binarized image files should be placed as `./data/multi_line_bw_128/*`.



## References

* Dupont et al., 2018; [https://arxiv.org/abs/1802.03065](https://arxiv.org/abs/1802.03065)
